OP_PAIRCOMMIT (#1699)
bitcoin/bips: bip-PC.md

  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: <links to wiki page for comments>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2024-11-08
  License: BSD-3-CLAUSE
</pre>

## Abstract

This BIP describes a new tapscript opcode `OP_PAIRCOMMIT` which
provide limited vector commitment functionality in tapscript.

When evaluated, the `OP_PAIRCOMMIT` instruction:
* Pops the top two values off the stack,
* takes the "PairCommit" tagged SHA256 hash of the stack elements,
* pushes the resulting commitment on the top of the stack.

## Motivation

To do LN-Symmetry contracts that don't require the nodes to keep old states,
we need to solve the data availability problem presented by unilateral closes.
Channel peers must be able to reconstruct the script that spends an
intermediate state.

Using in sequence `OP_CHECKTEMPLATEVERIFY`, `OP_PAIRCOMMIT`, `OP_INTERNALKEY`
and `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK` we can construct a rebindable channel that is also
optimal.

If `OP_CAT` was available, it could be used to combine multiple stack elements,
that get verified with `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK` as a valid state update.

`OP_PAIRCOMMIT` solves this specific problem without introducing a wide range

> of potentially controversial new behaviors, such as novel 2-way peg mechanisms.

Reviewer: It sounds like OP_PAIRCOMMIT is closely related to CAT and CSFS. Could you perhaps expand on the related work and design decisions in a Rationale section?

Author: Alternatives we discussed:
* OP_CAT
* Merkle operation opcodes
* SHA256 streaming opcodes
* 'Kitty' CAT (result or inputs limited in size to try disable introspection and arithmetic extension uses)
* OP_CTV also commiting to the taproot annex in tapscript
* OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK variant on n elements as message instead of 1
* OP_VECTORCOMMIT (decoupling above behavior)

Finally after weighing everything OP_PAIRCOMMIT was the simplest addition that got what we needed exactly in the most efficient way. It's a minimal code change, very easy to reason about. Therefore we expect it to be the least controversial option.

Sadly a lot of it is all over the place and on unsearchable mediums.

Reviewer: That’s why I am suggesting that this proposal should collect some of that information.

Author: I would prefer to keep it simple and to the point. Added a more brief rationale section. Could do a more in depth recollection on what we learned and why certain alternatives fell out of favor on a delving thread we link from here, if people are actually curious.

Author: Expanded on the rationale behind `OP_PAIRCOMMIT `on [delvingbitcoin](https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/op-paircommit-as-a-candidate-for-addition-to-lnhance/1216/12?u=moonsettler).

that is not vulnerable to various forms of witness malleability. It is however,
highly optimized for just 2 stack elements.

```text
# pc-hash = PC(a, PC(b, c))

<a> <b> <c> | PC PC <pc-hash> OP_EQUALVERIFY
```

### Use in LN-Symmetry

The following assembly-like pseudo-code shows a possible LN-Symmetry channel
construction, that provides data availability to spend to the latest state from
an earlier state pushed on-chain with a forced close by channel partner.

```text
# S = 500000000
# IK -> A+B
<sig> <state-n-recovery-data> <state-n-hash> | CTV PC IK CSFS <S+1> CLTV DROP
```
before funding sign first state template:
```text
# state-n-hash { nLockTime(S+n), out(contract, amount(A)+amount(B)) }
# settlement-n-hash { nSequence(2w), out(A, amount(A)), out(B, amount(B)) }
# state-n-recovery-data { settlement-n-hash or state-n-balance }

# contract for state n < m
IF
  <sig> <state-m-recovery-data> <state-m-hash> | CTV PC IK CSFS <S+n+1> CLTV DROP
ELSE
  <settlement-n-hash> CTV
ENDIF
```

## Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is provided here:

https://github.com/lnhance/bitcoin/pull/6/files

> 

Author: ## Rationale

If `OP_CAT` was available, it could be used to combine multiple stack elements,
that get verified with `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK` as a valid state update.

`OP_PAIRCOMMIT` solves this specific problem without introducing a wide range
of potentially controversial new behaviors, such as novel 2-way peg mechanisms.

### Alternatives discussed

* OP_CAT

`OP_CAT` allows for fine grained introspection possibly bigint operations and
extending the arithmetic capabilities of bitcoin script using lookup tables.

* SHA256 streaming opcodes

These would predictably allow for the same functionality as `OP_CAT` for
introspection purposes, since verification of a computation is largely
equivalent with carrying it out. Bigint and new arithmetic operations would
be hard or even impossible.

* Merkle operation opcodes

These would be of very limited general use and hard to rationalize without
OP_CAT. Their complexity and resource cost is hard to justified for vector
commitments only. Compatibility considerations with taproot MAST were also
hard to resolve without knowing what other opcodes may be activated in the
future.

* 'Kitty' CAT (result or inputs limited in size)

The original idea would have limited the maximum size of `OP_CAT` output to a
size that is smaller than the smallest sighash preimage, thus disabling the
introspection capabilities and trivial ways to extend the arithmetic repertoir
of bitcoin script. This turned out to be an awkward, arbitrary and offering
weak .

* OP_CHECKTEMPLATEVERIFY commiting to the taproot annex in tapscript

A CTV template can be considered a sighash, however relaxing the relay policy
to take advantage of this change would make various endogenous asset protocols
more efficient, and therefore be controversial. There is also no consensus on
how to use or how to structure the annex.

* OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK on n elements as message

This was previosuly discussed and also implemented, it complicates the code
and is a pretty arbitrary coupling of behaviors.

* OP_VECTORCOMMIT

The obvious generalized solution for committing to n stack elements, however
it involves looping and hard to argue about setting the proper limits to it.

<pre>
  BIP: ?
  Layer: Consensus (soft fork)
  Title: OP_PAIRCOMMIT
  Author: moonsettler <moonsettler@protonmail.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: <links to wiki page for comments>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2024-11-08
  License: BSD-3-CLAUSE
</pre>

## Abstract

This BIP describes a new tapscript opcode `OP_PAIRCOMMIT` which

> provide limited vector commitment functionality in tapscript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provides limited vector commitment functionality in tapscript.
```

When evaluated, the `OP_PAIRCOMMIT` instruction:
* Pops the top two values off the stack,

> * takes the "PairCommit" tagged SHA256 hash of the stack elements,

Reviewer 2: consider linking to the section in bip340 about tagged hashes

Author: It is linked from Specification (line 53), not sure I would want to link from here.

* pushes the resulting commitment on the top of the stack.

## Motivation

To do LN-Symmetry contracts that don't require the nodes to keep old states,
we need to solve the data availability problem presented by unilateral closes.
Channel peers must be able to reconstruct the script that spends an

> intermediate state.

Reviewer 2: what data needs to be available? how does PC solve that problem (does it stick the data in the witness and put a commitment somewhere covered by a signature? something else?)? Is this mechanism useful for things outside of LN-Symmetry?

Author: The data that needs to be available for state n is:
```text
state-n-recovery-data { settlement-n-hash or state-n-balance }
```
This is needed to reconstruct the whole script for the nth state address that the funds move to by the channel peer that only holds the latest state, so he can spend to the latest state.

Author: Updated. I believe we can resolve these conversations? @rot13maxi @murchandamus

Using in sequence `OP_CHECKTEMPLATEVERIFY`, `OP_PAIRCOMMIT`, `OP_INTERNALKEY`
and `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK` we can construct a rebindable channel that is also

> optimal.

Reviewer: This paragraph seems to indicate that the `OP_PAIRCOMMIT` proposal would be especially useful in combination with these other opcodes. Could you perhaps clarify whether and how `OP_PAIRCOMMIT` is useful by itself in absence of the other three opcodes you mention here?

Author: LNhance at it's core is `CTV `+ `CSFS`. They together provide the core utility. `IKEY `is an optimization for not having to pay for the pubkey twice when the internal key can be used. `PC` is an optimization when `CSFS `has to commit to additional data required to recreate a spend script from an intermediate state, because `OP_RETURN` (to which `CTV` naturally commits to) is 4x more expensive in weight units for data availability.

`PC` could also be used by `CHECKCONTRACTVERIFY` to carry a complex state in the absence of `CAT`.

I don't think anyone would find `PC` useful enough to activate in isolation without the aforementioned other opcodes.
It can do general merkle tree style commitments that are not compatible with other merkle tree structures in bitcoin.

We probably will make a new BIP for LNhance that has these other BIPs as "Relies on".

Reviewer: I meant that these explanations should be part of the BIP, not just part of the conversation here in the pull request comments.

Author: So should I link the "Use in LN-Symmetry" section from there? Or it needs better explanation?

Author: Really leaning towards making a head BIP for LNhance and keeping the individual BIPs strictly limited to describing functionality without a lot of speculation on applications. (Which we would do after finalizing the individual ops.)

Is there a problem with this approach?

Reviewer: If you are creating multiple BIPs that only make sense together, it would be better to propose them as a single pull request. Since this is being proposed standalone, it should also provide its own raison d’être.

Author: Maybe I should write that it was an explicit design goal that PAIRCOMMIT is pretty much completely useless on it's own with the current set of opcodes?

Reviewer 3: > I meant that these explanations should be part of the BIP, not just part of the conversation here in the pull request comments.

While BIP-2 recommends that `a single BIP contain a single key proposal or new idea. The more focused the BIP, the more successful it tends to be. If in doubt, split your BIP into several well-focused ones`, I agree that background context like https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/1699#discussion_r1856937991 ought to be here in the open source BIP, and not only as GitHub meta-data (review comments) or an entry in Delving.

Reviewer 4: PairCommit is generically useful as a concept, and I think that having things like this spec'd, implemented, and deployable is a positive good towards improving bitcoin.

Further, new things that synergize with exisiting older concepts having to go together into the same PR would create a disincentive for people to share and work on new ideas, since it would make them "less mature" as a package. For example, when I published the CTV V2 Hashing Spec WIP BIP, it would have made ZERO sense for that to go into the CTV BIP (or CTV PR, were it not merged), since it's a standalone concept. A concept that now, thanks to me writing it up, can be discussed against PairCommit as an alternative.

wholeheartedly support this being a standalone BIP and PR.

Reviewer: Thanks for weighing in, @JeremyRubin.

<pre>
  BIP: ?
  Layer: Consensus (soft fork)
  Title: OP_PAIRCOMMIT
  Author: moonsettler <moonsettler@protonmail.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: <links to wiki page for comments>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2024-11-08
  License: BSD-3-CLAUSE
</pre>

## Abstract

> This BIP describes a new tapscript opcode `OP_PAIRCOMMIT` which

Reviewer 3: Needs a comma before "which" here.

```suggestion
This BIP describes a new tapscript opcode `OP_PAIRCOMMIT`, which
```

Given the stack `[x1, x2]`, where `x2` is at the top of the stack:

`OP_PAIRCOMMIT` will push `SHA256(tagPC|cs(x1)|x1|cs(x2)|x2)` onto the stack.

Where `|` denotes concatenation and `tagPC` is calculated according to
[BIP-340] tagged hash as `SHA256("PairCommit")|SHA256("PairCommit")` and
`cs(x)` means `CompactSize(x)`.

### Implementation

```c++
case OP_PAIRCOMMIT: {
    // OP_PAIRCOMMIT is only available in Tapscript
    // ...
    // x1 x2 -- hash
    if (stack.size() < 2) {
        return set_error(serror, SCRIPT_ERR_INVALID_STACK_OPERATION);
    }
    const valtype& vch1 = stacktop(-2);
    const valtype& vch2 = stacktop(-1);

    uint256 hash = PairCommitHash(vch1, vch2);

    stack.pop_back();
    stack.pop_back();
    stack.emplace_back(hash.begin(), hash.end());
    break;
}
```
```c++
const HashWriter HASHER_PAIRCOMMIT{TaggedHash("PairCommit")};

uint256 PairCommitHash(const std::vector<unsigned char>& x1, const std::vector<unsigned char>& x2)
{
    return (HashWriter{HASHER_PAIRCOMMIT} << x1 << x2).GetSHA256();
}
```
### Use in script

`OP_PAIRCOMMIT` can be used to commit to a vector of stack elements in a way

> that is not vulnerable to various forms of witness malleability. It is however,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that is not vulnerable to various forms of witness malleability. It is, however,
```

highly optimized for just 2 stack elements.

```text
# pc-hash = PC(a, PC(b, c))

<a> <b> <c> | PC PC <pc-hash> OP_EQUALVERIFY
```

### Use in LN-Symmetry

The following assembly-like pseudo-code shows a possible LN-Symmetry channel

> construction, that provides data availability to spend to the latest state from

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
construction that provides data availability to spend to the latest state from
```

an earlier state pushed on-chain with a forced close by channel partner.

```text
# S = 500000000
# IK -> A+B
<sig> <state-n-recovery-data> <state-n-hash> | CTV PC IK CSFS <S+1> CLTV DROP
```

> before funding sign first state template:

Reviewer 3: (If I understand what is meant here)

```suggestion
before funding, first sign the state template:
```

Author: that is the first "state template" as in the first state settlement i will write "sign the first state"

```text
# state-n-hash { nLockTime(S+n), out(contract, amount(A)+amount(B)) }
# settlement-n-hash { nSequence(2w), out(A, amount(A)), out(B, amount(B)) }
# state-n-recovery-data { settlement-n-hash or state-n-balance }

# contract for state n < m
IF
  <sig> <state-m-recovery-data> <state-m-hash> | CTV PC IK CSFS <S+n+1> CLTV DROP
ELSE
  <settlement-n-hash> CTV
ENDIF
```

### Use with future updates

Detailed introspection opcodes would also need vector commitments when used
with `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK`.

`OP_CHECKCONTRACTVERIFY` would also need a way to carry complex data.

## Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is provided here:

https://github.com/lnhance/bitcoin/pull/6/files

## Rationale

> If `OP_CAT` was available, it could be used to combine multiple stack elements,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If `OP_CAT` was available, it could be used to combine multiple stack elements
```

that get verified with `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK` as a valid state update.

`OP_PAIRCOMMIT` solves this specific problem without introducing a wide range
of potentially controversial new behaviors, such as novel 2-way peg mechanisms.

> `OP_RETURN` could also be used for ensuring the availability of the state

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, `OP_RETURN` could be used to ensure the availability of the state
```

> recovery data as `OP_CHECKTEMPLATEVERIFY` naturally commits to all outputs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
recovery data, as `OP_CHECKTEMPLATEVERIFY` naturally commits to all outputs.
```

> However the cost of that would be over 4 times higher in weight units.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, its cost in weight units would be over 4 times higher than that of using OP_PAIRCOMMIT`.
```

One way to think about the 3 opcodes (`OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK`, `OP_INTERNALKEY`,
`OP_PAIRCOMMIT`) is we decompose a `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK` variant that can use

> 1 byte `OP_TRUE` public key (substitute for the *taproot internal key*) and can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a 1-byte `OP_TRUE` public key (substituting for the *taproot internal key*) and can
```

> commit to a number of stack elements as message.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
commit to a number of stack elements as a message.
```

> ### Behaviours LNhance tries to avoid introducing

Reviewer 3: Per your spelling of the word in the next sentence after.

```suggestion
### Behaviors LNhance tries to avoid introducing
```

The following behaviors are out of scope for LNhance and should not be enabled
as a side effect without explicit consensus:

> * Fine grained introspection

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Fine-grained introspection
```

> * State carrying covenants

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* State-carrying covenants
```

* OP_CAT
* SHA256 streaming opcodes
* Merkle operation opcodes
* 'Kitty' CAT: result or inputs arbitrarily limited in size
* OP_CHECKTEMPLATEVERIFY committing to the taproot annex in tapscript
* OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK on n elements as message
* OP_VECTORCOMMIT: generalized form for n > 2 elements

### Cost comparison of LN-Symmetry constructions

| Method        | ChannelS | UpdateSc | UpdateWi | 1-Update  | 2-Update  |
| :------------ | -------: | -------: | -------: | --------: | --------: |
| APO-annex     |  2.25 vB | 28.25 vB |    25 vB |    305 vB |  461.5 vB |
| APO-return    |  2.25 vB | 28.25 vB |  16.5 vB |  338.5 vB |  528.5 vB |
| CTV+CSFS+IKEY |  2.75 vB | 12.25 vB |  24.5 vB |    331 vB |    513 vB |
| CTV+CSFS      |    11 vB |  20.5 vB |  24.5 vB |  347.5 vB | 537.75 vB |
| LNhance       |     3 vB |  12.5 vB | 32.75 vB | 297.75 vB | 446.25 vB |
| rekey         |  7.25 vB | 16.75 vB | 73.75 vB | 347.25 vB |    541 vB |

### Proving general computation

Merkle trees can be used to prove out computation where the root of the tree
represents the *function* and the leaves represent the *inputs* and *output*.

> There are practical limits to the entropy space for the *inputs* as it needs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are practical limits to the entropy space for the *inputs*, as they need
```

> to be iterated over and hashed up.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to be iterated over and hashed.
```

Author: "hashed into a merkle root"?

> Currently MAST trees can cover 128 bits of entropy space, which is well over

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MAST trees can currently cover 128 bits of entropy space, which is well over
```

> the practical limits to iterate over and merklize. Therefore we assume this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the practical limits to iterate over and merklize. Therefore, we assume this
```

capability does not materially extend what computations are possible to prove

> out in bitcoin script. While `OP_PAIRCOMMIT` is not limited to a height of 128,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in bitcoin script. While `OP_PAIRCOMMIT` is not limited to a height of 128,
```

that should not be practically feasible to utilize.

> There is a way to reduce the size of the witness for proving out computation,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is a way to reduce the size of the witness for proving computation
```

<pre>

>   BIP: ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  BIP: 442
```

  Layer: Consensus (soft fork)
  Title: OP_PAIRCOMMIT
  Author: moonsettler <moonsettler@protonmail.com>

>   Comments-Summary: No comments yet.

Reviewer: The Comments-Summary header is optional, and the comment system has fallen out of use. (And will hopefully be sunset in the near future.)

```suggestion
```

  Comments-URI: <links to wiki page for comments>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track

>   Created: 2024-11-08

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Created: 2024-12-09
```

using `OP_PAIRCOMMIT`.

One way to think about the 3 opcodes (`OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK`, `OP_INTERNALKEY`,
`OP_PAIRCOMMIT`) is we decompose a `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK` variant that can use
a 1-byte `OP_TRUE` public key (substituting for the *taproot internal key*) and can
commit to a number of stack elements as a message.

### Behaviors LNhance tries to avoid introducing

The following behaviors are out of scope for LNhance and should not be enabled
as a side effect without explicit consensus:

* Fine-grained introspection
* State-carrying covenants
* Bigint operations
* New arithmetic capabilities using lookup tables

### Alternative approaches

The following list of alternative approaches were discussed and rejected for
various reasons, either for expanding the scope or for unnecessary complexity:

* OP_CAT
* SHA256 streaming opcodes
* Merkle operation opcodes
* 'Kitty' CAT: result or inputs arbitrarily limited in size
* OP_CHECKTEMPLATEVERIFY committing to the taproot annex in tapscript
* OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK on n elements as message
* OP_VECTORCOMMIT: generalized form for n > 2 elements

### Cost comparison of LN-Symmetry constructions

> | Method        | ChannelS | UpdateSc | UpdateWi | 1-Update  | 2-Update  |

Reviewer: The terms "ChannelS", "UpdateSc", "UpdateWi", "1-Update", and "2-Update" seem to not be defined in this document. Perhaps they should be described here to provide context, or if this is in reference to another document, that document should be linked in this section for context.

Author: Will try to figure something out, it's Channel Script, Update Script, Update Witness, total cost with 1 or 2 updates.
@reardencode?
